Okay.
Can you focus on what we're supposed to be doing?
I guess.
Okay.
Thank you.
Now tell me your name and age again, please.
My name is Felix Jose Alvarez.
I am 68 years old.
I was born in 1951 on March 29th.
Okay.
And where were you born?
McAllen, Texas.
Okay.
Excellent.
All right.
So can you tell me... Let's see.
So when you were... In the late 60s, you were how old?
In the late 60s...
In 1969, I was 18 years old.
1969.
And so do you consider yourself a participant of the Chicano movement?
I consider myself to be a...
A, what do you call it?
I was going to say a leader in the Chicano movement, but I think I'd rather say I was a propagandist for the Chicano movement.
And why do you say that?
Of the Chicano movement.
Because I made a conscious decision
in 1969 to participate as an activist and identifying myself as a Chicano.
And before that, I had considered, I had identified myself as a Tejano Mexicano.
So in 1969, you said you made a conscious choice to identify as a Chicano and to promote and agitate and take this identity to the
Southwest.
And so was the Chicano movement or whatever you decided to join or to make a conscious choice to be a Chicano, was that something that you saw was already kind of like something that had already started and you were joining it?
Or do you see it as something that was like forming when you joined it?
It was forming and it was forming
And it was multifaceted in the sense that there were groups of people in different parts of the U.S.
Southwest who were identifying with it.
And so each one, what I experienced, because I was a part of the
Teatro Campesino, as we traveled around the country organizing through the use of Teatro Chicano, that made us at the forefront of those who were using our vehicle, a cultural vehicle, to promote the idea of Chicanismo to every town and community or city that we traveled.
And we met Raza all the way from Chicago, Illinois, the Midwest, the Southwest, the Northwest, and Texas, Oklahoma, all of that, that whole area.
And what made it, or what made my decision to be a Chicano activist with the Teatro
Campesino was that I had started going to Fresno State University and the Raza that was attending that year, the fall of 1969, everyone that was a part of the Chicano group in Fresno State were from all over
the valley, you know, people from San Jose, people from, uh, Sacramento and me coming from Livingston, which is like about, I don't know, 80 miles or so from Fresno.
And, and so all of us were being, um, we're looking at, at
how we were going to engage our activism.
And I remember at Fresno State, there was a group, Mecha, and I wasn't very interested in becoming a part.
Did you stop?
I wasn't very interested in becoming a part of Mecha because it seemed to me that it was too...
too frivolous or not as engaged or interested in other social justice issues that affected the Chicano or the Raza community.
I remember that the activities that I saw them engaged in, which was mostly
Parties, social stuff.
And so I basically said no to that involvement.
And when I saw the Teatro Campesino performing, I saw them as a more focused or committed beyond, you know, just dressing up and trying to act like they were Chicanos.
but rather that they were doing something about, they were a propaganda group as I saw it.
And I thought, this is something that I want to be, that I could be a real part of because we're going outside of the schools, we're going out in the community, we're going out to other parts, to other communities, and we're telling, the message that we were taking was that people needed to organize, that people needed to
band together and unite against the different institutions that were impacting or affecting Raza communities in a negative way.
So some of these that we identified and that I identified with was what was going on in the schools, anti-war efforts against the Vietnam War, racist,
policies?
Not necessarily policies, but just the racist behavior of the police and individual people that were always taking advantage of Raza and oppressing them with violence and taking advantage of them, taking their land and all of that.
And
The reason that I've had that kind of an awareness or focus was because I grew up in a family where my mother and my grandfather, my maternal grandfather, had always been activists in the familia.
They didn't call themselves Chicanos.
They just saw themselves as a part of the Mexican community that always stood up for the underdog or always stood up for their people, their community.
and didn't allow for institutions or individuals to take advantage of them or take advantage of people in our community.
And that started back in Texas, so I grew up with that.
And when we came to California in 1966, it continued because we saw it all around us.
So when I became part of the Teatro Campesino in 1969, it was very easy for me to become engaged in a group that was standing up, speaking out, going all over the community and the country to try to raise the awareness, the consciousness, the activism of other communities against the way they were being treated.
And so for me, it wasn't about, so becoming Chicano for me meant uniting with other raza people that were beginning to say, hey, you know, we've got to stand up for ourselves.
My difference with the student movement was that it was very short-lived type of movement in the sense that
It appeared that people only got involved in the two years or four years that they were going to college.
After that, they went into the workforce or whatever institution they went into.
They maintained the Chicano awareness and consciousness because they were supporting bigger efforts that were taking place out of the community, like supporting the farm workers.
And that's the teatro, or are you talking about the students?
No, I'm talking about the students.
In other words, there was always an opportunity for students to become engaged in the greater community about social, cultural issues in the Chicano community, and some of them did, but many didn't.
They just were active and involved when they were in school.
And for me, that's part of the attraction that I had with the Teatro Campesino because I saw it not as a temporary organization that was only concerned about the movement or the issues because we were all in college or anything like that.
I saw it as a more permanent institution that was looking
and searching for its own self-independent realization of identity, who we are, where we come from, who our history and our cultural roots were, and then above and beyond that about activism, about what were the things that we could do and organize and implement in our communities to help
our communities.
The one difference I think that I had above a lot of the other people that were involved with the Teatro Campesino was that because I was raised by an activist mom and an activist grandfather, their view of what the struggle was about was not about getting a better job, getting an education,
getting into Hollywood or anything like that, their perspective had a connection directly to the land.
In other words, we lost, we were robbed of a territory that belonged to our community.
And so they, my grandfather always spoke about the United States carpetbaggers that came into Texas and literally
killed Mexicans, robbed their lands, took it over.
And as I got older, I began to realize that that didn't just take place in Texas, but that it took place in New Mexico, in Arizona, in California.
And not only to Mexican people, but to the native people that lived in those regions were not only did they lose their land, but many of them were eliminated.
I mean, there's very, very few
members of their tribes that are left even today.
Um, and so my grandfather always focused on that.
This was all about La Tierra, about, about the, um, getting our, our territories back and fighting back.
So when the concept of Aztlan emerged among us and the idea that, that we are a part of the native people,
of the Southwest, that really enhanced my view of what the Chicano movement, Chicano consciousness was all about.
It was about how do we connect back with all that has been taken from us, and I'm talking about land, I'm talking about cultural ways, I'm talking about wisdom, I'm talking about spiritual beliefs, all of that, because
the major institutions of the United States and of Spanish Mexico was that they did away with our way of life.
I'm literally destroying it, blowing it up, burning it up, and all of that.
And the more I uncovered for myself the truth of
of our reality, the more Chicano I became.
And so because I was involved in this organization that we were looking at our culture, cultural ways, our wisdom, our roots, it just became clearer and clearer to me that I was on the right path, at least in terms of trying to identify
what this Chicano movement was about.
And for me as, as I got older.
Okay.
We're back.
Um, well, this gives me a good opportunity to interject here.
Um, so
I heard a lot of, well, okay, let me start with this.
So you know that my project is about trying to understand the connection or the understanding of mesizaje during the Chicano movement.
Okay.
And I think before I get to that, because there were some interesting things that you had brought up when you were kind of telling your story about why you, you know, you got involved in the movement and the kind of involvement that you got into.
But one thing that you mentioned a couple of times was this idea of Chicanismo and
and Chicano consciousness.
And so I was wondering if you could maybe say a little bit more about like what or how you understand those types of things or those concepts.
Okay.
Let me, I guess what I'm saying, the way that I understood that was one part has to do with the way I was raised.
with my mom and grandfather being able to convey to me part of their resistance to the way of life of Mexicanos Tejanos in Texas and how they were treated by the Anglo and how we responded or how they responded to that.
And it bred in me the consciousness of that
there's something wrong, you know, in, in terms of how we're being treated.
And then here's a historical connections as to why that took place.
So number one is because they stole our homeland.
They stole the land.
They took it by war and they took it by sheer violence and they created a militia that kept that violence.
And that's the Texas Rangers.
So all of this history and background grew up with.
So,
As a teenager, I also felt it directly because I went to schools in Texas where they still practice capital punishment.
Capital punishment.
Not capital punishment.
Corporal punishment.
And I remember that if we spoke Spanish in school,
you would get three swats.
You'd be sent to the principal, and the principal would physically hit you with a board for speaking Spanish.
And I remember growing up in South Texas, speaking Spanish, speaking English.
In my family, we spoke bilingually.
I mean, empezábamos hablar en español, and we would go right into English.
We had no problem communicating that way.
And I grew up in a family where we were able to do that.
So when we were in school as teenagers and stuff, we would always be talking like that.
And we would always get pointed out by our Anglo students and turned in and were beaten.
So I grew up with that.
And I also grew up with my mother being involved in trying to get our community to vote.
And they would always be
uh, turned back at the voting polls because one stupid reason or another, oh, you don't bring your own pencil and you can't do it.
I mean, stupid little shit like that.
So I grew up with all of that.
Uh, and so when I came to California, I continued to see the mistreatment of our community from working in the fields, um,
being paid low wages, no bathrooms, all of that stuff that the farm workers and the Farm Workers Union were fighting for farm workers to have, you know, basic human needs out in the workplace.
And I also saw the brutality of women, farm worker women, with single families being exploited and taken advantage of
by Contratistas and others.
And it never escaped my view.
I always had something in me that said that's not right.
And so when I went to, when I graduated from high school, I went to Fresno and joined the Teatro Campesino.
That seemed to me the perfect vehicle to get the message out, to get these ideas out to the community.
And as a part of doing that, it allowed me the opportunity to do research, which was, we didn't have the internet like you do now.
So, you know, I began to look into the history of
the Texas Rangers, look into the history of education and basically start the process of educating myself to have a better understanding of what I was talking about or that we were all talking about so we could present as much truth against the lies that we were living under because we thought that's the way it was.
Okay.
And when I decided to become Chicano,
from a Tejano-Mexicano identity that I always carried with me was when I saw young students and young raza beginning to call themselves Chicanos and that they were proud of that name and that this was kind of like the unifying name that we were all taking and that we were all trying to
to define or to establish.
And so I gave up my, I didn't give up my Tejano-Mexicano identity, but what I did is I decided that the Chicano identity was the better road to take because it expanded, it expanded the Tejano-Mexicano view or worldview to a bigger worldview.
Okay.
And then when
When Chicanos begin identifying with the idea of Aztlan, which is the land from where the, and the Aztec myth of how they, or story of how they ended up in Mexico City.
When you begin to look at that story about how they came from the north and they went south and they were the outside group coming into Mexico,
a city which was already established, already had pyramids, already had all these other native people living in and around that one geographical area.
And these outsiders came from the north, these new people.
Then it became clear to me that they came from somewhere in the southwest.
And I've always identified over the years, I've always identified that area to be the four corners, like Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, that area.
And I've always gone back to that area in pilgrimage to a root area that I think would be comparable to what Aslan is.
But more than that, that it's part of our ancestral root.
It isn't just in Mexico.
It isn't just the Aztecs, the Mayas, the Zapotecs, but that we're one people.
Somos uno.
And that our cultural ways are not very different from people all the way from Alaska or the northern part all the way down to the southern part of Patagonia.
And so that was part of my universal connection to that.
It wasn't about me being Tejano regionalistic or Chicano, but rather that I'm a part of a whole continent and it ain't called America.
But so is that an evolution of thought that you have?
Well, but I mean, so is it an evolution of thought as you have aged and as you have learned more?
So like in 1969, was that your thought or is this something that has progressed since then?
It's progressed since then, but it emerged very quickly from 1968.
Yeah.
to let's say 1973.
And so can I clarify, because the original question was about how you understand Chicanismo, right?
And so what I heard you talk about was being familiar with the history of people from the Southwest, right?
So you called yourself a Tejano Mexicano, right?
And that a lot of what you learned and that a lot of what you learned about being from that area was from your mother and your father.
And their activism.
And their activism there and understanding how things were the way they were.
Right?
Right.
They had a better understanding of the condition that they were living in and under because
they connected they had a connection of historical significance to to the region for hundreds of years in other words they weren't immigrants that just arrived there and like oh what's here you know they they had a history there yeah okay so so okay so relating that back to chicanismo do you see or
Am I understanding that your understanding of Chicanismo has to do with understanding how the history affects the present?
Like, is that part of it?
My development of Chicanismo is that...
the prize, the goal, the mission, the Chicano mission is to take our territories back, our way of life back.
And so the role of Chicanismo is to commit yourself to that endeavor.
It's not about, oh, I'm going to, my goal was to be the first one to go to college,
and get a job and all of that shit.
None of that crap has anything to do with being Chicano.
So kind of like, uh, what you were talking about earlier when you were saying, you know, uh, kind of like a reclamation of not only the territory, but okay.
So, so you had said, well, let me, let me just finish that thought because you had mentioned that you,
You saw it as a reclamation of the territory, the culture, the spirituality, the ways of life, right?
And so you see that as like, that is the mission of Chicanismo is kind of reclaiming those things that had been taken.
Yes, yes.
And what I was going to say is that how that
idea evolved or developed within me was because I was a part of a group, an organization that went around the community, that went around through the Southwest, went into Mexico.
So I got to see communities that I had never connected with.
And what I found in that experience was that we were one.
In other words,
chicanos raza in colorado and seattle didn't matter where they were from we we immediately connected we had connections and part of it too had to do with and i don't know how you want to classify this but it has to do with this value that we've had or not a value uh this experience common experience that we've had which is
that we are like the tribes were, you know, 500, 600 years ago where they, they migrated, they lived here, then they lived there and they migrated to different, to different places.
Well, I became a migrant when my family left Texas and came to California and we were following the crop in near Oregon and
And then when I was a part of the teatro, I saw myself as a migrant because we took our messages and our activism to different communities, people that we'd never met before.
But we were coming with a social consciousness.
It wasn't just about doing a play about no saco nada de la escuela, I don't get anything out of school, or los vendidos, or any of the plays and actos that we did.
What we were doing is we were,
culturally and spiritually connecting with raza all over the place.
They didn't even know what they were watching until they saw us.
And when they saw us, they responded and reacted internally.
In other words, they weren't thinking, and I keep saying this thing, they weren't thinking, oh, let's, our Chicano activism is, let's get Chicanos into Hollywood.
It was never about that, but rather it was about connecting
cultural connections to Raza all over.
And one of the things that I personally discovered in doing this, migrating around with the Teatro, was that many of the communities that were like in Detroit, in Seattle, in Kansas, and da-da-da-da-da, were migrant Tejanos that had traveled the migrant paths, Florida.
picking the fields and all that and leaving raza in all these communities.
And so when I had showed up with a teatro, which was Chicanos from California and myself from Texas, was that I was making better connections.
Because these were my people, kind of a thing.
And so I realized, I said, shoot, this is no different than what
The native, our native ancestors who traveled from the north and went south to Mexico, who were dropping off their people in different parts of Mexico.
And so, so it led me to the awareness of the consciousness that we're one.
Somos uno.
So if I have any concept to promote as a Chicano for over 50 years, is that we're what?
I don't care where, what part you live in, we're one people.
And the transition is above and beyond that now to include the other regional native people, whether they be Sioux, Hopi, Navajo, MODOK, whatever, Chiricahua.
And irregardless of the historical history that keeps telling people, oh, well, Mexicans killed the natives and da-da-da.
Yeah, Mexicans, when you say Mexicans, you're talking about government.
You're not talking about the actual people.
And all you have to do is look today at the Mexican government, which has been oppressive to native communities in Mexico as well.
So you can't be so simple-minded and say, oh, well, Mexicans are the oppressors too.
You have to cut through all that shit and throw it out and say all of that is part of the mierda, the shit that the Anglo oppressors in the United States placed upon Native people.
Because their policy, U.S.
policy, was eliminate.
So can I ask you about, so we're talking about Chicanismo right now and
Would you say that your view of Chicanismo, like, was that something that you felt other people also had a similar kind of vision of what that was?
Yes.
Or was it like, oh, this is how I view Chicanismo.
No, it was, you know, sometimes I felt like, well, am I the only one thinking this stuff?
Yeah.
And I've always seen the truth or the proof in that no matter where I went, I could have been in Minnesota or New York City for that matter.
And I would always run into similar thinking people in different conditions, but still similar.
I remember I met this young, he was younger than me, young Hopi.
And he was maybe a couple of years younger than me.
And he came and stayed with me in San Juan Bautista.
And he showed me how he cooked beans, frijoles, with chile and all of that.
And I remember appreciating that because that was a way different pot of beans than I had ever tasted.
But we were talking late into the night, and he was saying that he comes from a village in Arizona where the Hopi still live the way they've always lived.
In other words, they don't have any electricity, they don't have any of the modern conveniences, and their Hopi ancestors and elders
told them that the only way to fight Americans, America, and all of this that's happened to the Native world was to not live like a white person.
And that they always talked about a great vision that they've had in their history or in their mythology, saying that people at one time traveled south.
migrated south so they have those migration stories still with them and that one day the people would be migrating back to the north so when i heard him saying that i said we're doing it already it's already happening and so when
So as I went along the communities, I saw the connections in different parts of the country and with different people.
We were all saying the same story, but in different ways.
And the only thing missing was making that connection, saying, hey, we're all Native, all of us.
I don't care whether somebody's trying to measure blood percentage or not.
or that you look too white and you got blue eyes and all of that crap that the system places on the native communities to keep them divided and to keep them from realizing who they are, that we're one people.
And so I remember going as a young teatro guy back in the early seventies, we were performing in New York city and we somehow,
People would, if there wasn't one native person in the audience and he saw what we were doing, what we were seeing, they would come and connect.
It was just, I don't know, I don't know what you would call that process, but it was happening.
And I remember this guy came up and he said, I want to invite you guys to come over to our reservation.
Where is your reservation?
He says, we're up here in, what the hell was the name of it?
I want to say St.
Regis, St.
Regis.
They were, shoot, I can't think right now.
They were, I want to say Onondaga, but I'd have to look up the region for it.
This was a long time ago, but they were publishing a native newspaper in the reservation called Aquasasne Notes.
Okay, that you can research it and they're there.
And so this was a group of Native people from that area that were trying to, that were continuing the Native fight against the U.S.
and all that.
They had their own place.
And so we went over there with them.
And I remember...
We were being talked by one of the elders there, and the thing that connected to me through him was he was talking about how they recorded history, and they had this belt, a beaded belt that represented their political process, like how they governed history.
And he spoke about it and he said that this, that this structure that they had applied back in the, uh, in, you know, four or 500 years ago was the, the five, the Confederate, the Confederation, the Iroquois Confederation.
Okay.
And that's who I was meeting.
And they were saying that Teganahuita,
So I heard all those stories from these guys, and they made connections, or I made connections to, well, Daganahuit is just like Kitzhakot.
He's the guy who brought culture and art and unity and peace and all this kind of stuff.
And how they viewed the political decision process, which was by consensus, wasn't the way it is now.
So...
So this is how I evolved my Chicanismo is by making connections with groups of people that had pieces of what was taken from them and how they made sense to a greater image of what Chicanismo is all about or what it could be.
And then, so the young guy from the Hopis, this guy from the Confederate, what did I say it was called?
Confederacy, Iroquois Confederacy.
And so I've always met people in the last 50 years that were part of that.
When I went to Denver and met Corgi Gonzalez and the Crusade for Justice, they were different.
They were more like paramilitary type.
They were black berets, brown berets, red berets, green berets.
Man, I remember thinking, how funny, these guys got all the rainbow berets.
And we were out there, we performed for them, and then we were out there marching on one of their actions, and they had troops of berets marching up and down the street.
And, of course, they also had gun battles.
I mean, these guys were like,
And they had gun battles with the police at one point.
As a matter of fact, the day that we got there, we were told that we had to stand guard on the second floor with a rifle because they were getting bushwhacked by the police and white races during the night.
And we were staying there that night.
So that happened in Denver and that happened in Crystal City.
where you had Tejanos who now not only were carrying weapons but took over the government the mayor the sheriff and and uh and I was there I remember we arrived in Crystal City and the chief of police came out to meet us and took us around and we stayed at their one of their houses and
we got shot at you're saying the wait so in crystal city you were saying that they were that they had taken over those offices like no no they got elected yeah yeah yeah yeah they were more political right right but they also had to be right and so you know um so that was that in colorado in denver it wasn't like that what they did is they had a
They had bought their own cultural center.
They had a building.
It was an old school, second store.
Two stories or three, I forget.
And they were holding it.
Yeah.
In other words, they were viewing their Chicanismo and their sense of Aslan as this building is ours.
Nobody fucks with us.
Yeah.
Almost like Native people in the reservations where they're saying, hey, we run this.
We control it.
Yeah.
You have no power.
No governing power over us.
And so each got dealt in different ways.
And so the way they got dealt, in Colorado, we heard of several of the Crusade for Justice guys that got murdered, got killed, you know, and all that.
In Crystal City, I don't remember anybody getting shot or killed, but they got voted out.
Right.
Okay.
In California, you didn't have anything like that.
All you had was the farm workers.
movement, which is labor, and they had their 40 acres and they had La Paz, and so they had a compound.
The only other group that was trying to do that was us and the Teatro Campesino by creating a compound, a propagandistic compound in San Juan Bautista that was meant to be a propaganda center to reach out to the whole community.
Instead, it became a
Hollywood.
Acting paradise for actors that want to go to Hollywood.
All right.
So, um, so there wasn't in California, there wasn't anything.
I mean, if Chicanos in California are Mecha is our, that shows you how weak California Chicanos were.
Um, the only thing California has is it's got a few
Chicano politicians, which are neither here nor there, but none of that has anything to do with, with the, the focus of Chicanismo within our community.
What California also had is because of the cultural movement that we started, we were the first Chicano cultural center, Centro Campesino Cultural.
That's what I became a part of, not what it is now or whatever it's become.
And our goal was to do this independently.
We wanted to have our own self-realization place for us to continue to organize, develop, and propagandize.
And many Chicano cultural activists were drawn to
to it, and they still are, but it's so watered down and away from what it was that it no longer serves that purpose.
So when I left Teatro Cam Casino, I left it because I was confronted by Luis Valdez saying that, to put it in a nutshell, basically, and leaving out all the other shit, is he's saying to me, you are no longer
Felix Alvarez is a member of this organization that's trying to build this cultural center to promote Ticanismo and all that, but rather you are now my employee.
And I said, hell no.
I'm not your fucking employee.
I haven't been doing this shit for seven years because you're my boss.
Fuck you.
So
That isn't the true character of a Chicano.
A Chicano is not doing what he does because it's a payoff or because it's about money or getting a job or any of that.
And so once that took place, it was a complete selling out of the original idea of creating the Centro Campesino Cultural, which is what I was involved with.
You know what happened after that, so that's still there going on.
And that seems to be comparable to what I see happening in the universities where you have these, what do you call somebody that went to college and that's their alma mater?
Alumni?
Alumni.
So you see all these Chicano student alumni that were either Mecha, Frente, or whatever the hell they were.
who are now looking at, oh, it's 50 years of student organizing or whatever.
And so that's no different from Luis and the teatro and the cultural shit.
People say, oh, we were doing this 50 years ago.
And now it's not Chicano theater, it's American theater.
We're Americans.
Fuck you.
So would you say that the...
Well, because, I mean, so many... So I'm saying that my chicanismo evolved by the experiences, common experiences that I ran into.
Yes.
Sorry, my mom.
Um, well, so what I was going to say is that it's interesting that you were kind of talking about the different ways that the different regions were enacting their idea of Chicanism, right?
So you talked about like Colorado.
And it was a little more militant and like in Crystal City that it was more political.
And militant.
And that in California, like you felt that there was not really anything that had some kind of like unifying type of character aside from maybe the cultural stuff that you were talking about, right?
Exactly.
And so I was wondering because it sounds like...
given, like, some of the other stuff you were talking about with, like, the student movement, like, would you consider maybe that to be another kind of feature of, like, the California or West Coast region was, like, an emphasis on, like, the education?
And then also, if you could say maybe, like, how do you think the, because the Chicano moratorium happened in LA, right?
Yep.
So was that something organized by Californians, or was it organized by everybody?
California.
Okay, Chicano Moratorium, 1970, August.
That spring, we went to Teatro.
We went on a southwestern tour, for lack of a better word.
And we performed through Colorado, New Mexico, Arizona, Texas, and then back.
Part of what stood out for me in that... Another.
Part of what stood out for me in that one, that's the tour where we went to Colorado and I met Corky Gonzalez and all of a sudden telling you about them.
Yeah.
Also Crystal City, but we also went to Tierra Maria.
Reyes Lopez Tijerina and I met him and all of that.
And the difference between those two and Tijerina is that Tijerina, he was focusing his activism on the land, but Spanish, you know, because of the Spanish land rights.
Yeah.
And so
So even that was aligning itself with a Chicano kind of thing, but not really.
You know what I'm saying?
And history played itself out.
The guy became a preacher and who the hell knows what else happened.
But what it did is it helped evolve the view of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Okay?
So that added another piece to Chicanismo worldview in the sense of here's where the two governments, Mexican government and the U.S.
government undid the community and the people because they sold it out.
I mean, they totally sold it out.
So that's why back in that time, I wrote a play called El Maltratado de Guadalupe Hidalgo, The Mist
treatment of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, but maltratado means bad treaty.
Okay.
And so I don't know, do you ever hear about that?
No.
So in that play, I had Bernadette as my main actress in that play.
She played a saguaro cactus.
Okay.
I built a saguaro cactus out of paper mache and she was in it.
So my concept, my idea concept here was
Uh, and I got this from the Iroquois when I met them because they spoke of the great tree of life and that all the people are around the tree and everybody sees what they see from their perspective, but it's still the same tree.
Yeah.
And that the tree of life is basically part of the history.
So I decided to, to stretch that to, well, the Southwest, it's a cactus.
So the cactus has been sitting here for hundreds of years.
looking at everything that happens in its purview.
So the narrator and storyteller of this story is the cactus and Bernadette was in it.
But basically it tells the story of the westward expansion of the Gringos into the west and into California, the gold rush, making Mexicanos into bandits and how they took
cultural stuff and made it and and appropriated it from mi casas tu casa so i have a scene where i said the mexicanos are welcoming these settlers are coming in they're oh mi casas tu casa and you got water and the guy goes what did he say he said his land is your land hey that sounds like a good idea and he grabs it goes takes it over so using comedy but at the same time
showing that this is what took place.
They basically came in and they took over native land including Mexicans and so Tijerina was with the land-grant movement, the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, Texas was with taking over La Raza Unida party, political party and
And Colorado was with Chicano nationalism as a nation.
Okay.
That was their thing.
So I took all of that.
And then you got California with basically cultural poets, artists, writers, academics.
Okay.
I never,
I never associated with the academics.
I just had this thing for, because all I saw was they'd go there, they'd get brainwashed at the college and then they would sell out.
Better that I get it than somebody else.
They had no backbone, no backbone.
Even today, look at San Jose State.
They got fucking Blanca Alvarado in a meeting, what, two days ago.
She's the Chicano leader.
Bullshit.
And here's California again with their stupid-ass mecha crap that they're doing.
But to me, all of that doesn't matter because it's not real.
It's their own little drama stuff to keep control or focus of
of the university environment so that they can keep their jobs and keep on teaching and all of that.
It's like a self-serving thing.
It's like Luis and the Teatro just, you know, doing their little thing there.
This is like a side question, not really related to what I wanted to talk about, but do you think, like, it's somewhat, like, is that something to be expected, the state of, like,
the Chicano academia today, given that, like, what you were talking about, you know, how California didn't really have its own thing aside from the cultural performative, right?
The artistic, literary, performative aspect.
That would then become, like, the consequence of that?
California had the UFW.
Labor, farm labor.
That's their movement.
Yeah.
Okay.
And the students and the artists and all those other Chicanos, their connection to the movement is, oh, we were with Cesar.
Yes, I have a Welga flag.
But that, I mean, that goes back into that kind of question about like the performance, right?
Yeah.
And that comes out of the teatro too, because who the hell was it promoting?
So I'm realizing now that I'm,
Thinking about this and looking back at it that I wasn't like those other Chicanos in El Teatro.
Yeah.
At all.
Because if I was, I would have been over there with Kiki performing in Hollywood.
Yeah.
And I wouldn't.
What were we talking about?
Oh, the Chicano Moratorium.
Oh, yeah.
Let me get to the Chicano Moratorium.
Okay, okay, okay.
I got a little bit off of that only because what happened in that Southwest tour of 1970, which was before the moratorium, is that as we went out, we took an acto that we had just put together for the Chicano moratorium called Vietnam Campesino, which talked about the U.S.
agricultural and military
complex or whatever you want to call it.
Industrial complex.
Yes.
And that at one point during the Vietnam War, the army, the military was buying all the scab, lettuce, and grapes from the growers to undo the grape strike and all of that.
Yeah.
So they were in cahoots.
So when we saw that, part of our... So we decided to do this act of Vietnam Campesino.
to show how the U.S.
military agriculture complex was helping out growers by taking and buying all this shit and how they were affecting the farm workers in California, but then how they were napalming and affecting the campesino, the poor Vietnamese campesino.
And they were using Chicanos as soldiers to go do it.
And that's kind of like the whole focus of that acto.
And so when we went on this tour, we were the propaganda arm, our own self propaganda arm.
Nobody said, oh, can Teatro be the propaganda arm of the Chicano Moratorium?
No.
We just knew what to do.
So we went on this tour, and every town that we went to, we're telling them, August 29th, we're going to have a
Massive marcha in Los Angeles.
You need to come.
So Denver, New Mexico, Arizona, Texas.
And I think that's why we got so many people from everywhere.
Because we were the only ones doing it.
We didn't have internet.
We didn't have people on phones calling.
We didn't have Facebook or Twitter.
So we did that.
And...
And thousands showed up.
And we were there in the middle of this because not only were we protesting the killing of Chicanos in the Vietnam War and protesting against it, but people were also advocating for education, for all these different other issues.
And that's what that marcha became.
It became a rallying point
for all these things.
And we were in Fresno, getting ready to drive down there, and everybody was going in different cars.
And I remember I went with Phil in his car, and I took my brother Carlos with me.
He was only like 16.
And we got in the car, and then just before we took off from Fresno, one of the
Phil says, oh, I've got to stop over at the Brown Beret office because they want to know if we can carry some stuff in our trunk.
Okay, so we drive over there.
And Phil is, are you talking about Phil Esparza?
Yeah.
He and I became friends when I first went to Fresno and that's how I ended up becoming a part of the theater because he took me to the place.
So anyway, open up the trunk and here come the Brown Beret's
with duffel bags full of rifles and guns.
I mean, weapons.
I said, holy shit.
So we put them in there and Phil's like .
You didn't know what they were breaking.
We closed the thing and now we're headed to LA.
And so it turns out that they were going there to
be the protectors, the defenders or whatever, but they were taking real good.
And so anyway, before we get there, I'm already, you know, thinking ahead and going, oh, shit, this is going to be, this is going to be a slaughter of Raza, not them.
And I, and I, so I had a pre, what, a premonition?
Premonition.
So anyway, we get there and
The park is getting full of people, and Brown Berets are all around the perimeter, you know, doing their thing.
And so I don't know where the guns ended up, but I was over there by the stage area with my brother, and we're getting ready to go on.
We're going to do a couple of songs and some actos when shit starts breaking out at the corner.
We're here on the stage, and that corner, we start seeing, ah, look like a goddamn...
you know, those battles where people are just .
And it was starting there, and they were shooting canisters of gas into the crowd, toward the stage, everywhere, just .
It was all out battle.
And I turn around like this, looking for Carlos, and he's not there.
He's gone.
So I'm looking for him, and everybody's running away.
Yeah.
And I'm looking for my brother, and I can't find him, so I go into the middle of the thing.
And way over there at the front, what's happening, automatic organization.
People, men, are all hooking up arms and making a barrier, a wall, to keep the police from getting through and getting to the kids and the women and everybody else that was there, old ladies, grandma, didn't give a shit.
So there's one, two, three, there's like three or four lines like this, all vatos just getting like that.
Because they don't have weapons.
So I look over there and I see Carlos.
He's in the first.
And he's standing there like that.
And I see one of them goes over there and boom, whacks him.
And so, man, I just made a beeline for him.
I didn't give a shit about anything.
Just... And got him.
And we're... I was trying to get him out of there.
Let's get out of here.
Let's go.
Boom.
I didn't even know where to go.
I didn't know L.A.
So... I remember I got tripped up or knocked down.
And I'm on the floor.
And this cop with a riot helmet and everything comes over.
And he's about to hit me.
And this other Chicano...
out of nowhere with one of those jumbo quarts of beer.
Yeah.
And the cops.
Yeah, knocks them out.
And so I get up and grab my brother and head out to the exterior perimeter.
And then we're just, we got maced the whole thing.
There's this little old lady in her yard throwing water on people and she's, so we went through all of that and we're ducking
Rocks, brakes.
I mean, it's total mayhem.
Cars are getting overturned, burned.
Police cars, everything.
Police are zipping through there.
And then we end up, finally, after three or four hours of this, we end up all exhausted, sitting in a corner street.
And this Volkswagen bug, not bug, van, drives up to us, and there's two girls in there.
Where are you guys from?
So we're from Fresno, and we've lost our people.
Jump in, we'll take you to a safe house.
So we jump in.
Yeah, they were rescuing people.
So we ended up at their house, and it was UCLA Ballet Folklórico girls in their house.
So we ended up staying there that night, and...
That night, as we were waiting, we were trying to find out if we could find somebody that was going back to Fresno, hitch a ride back.
But that night, we were at their house, and the girls said, oh, we're all going over to the something, some club.
And I said, and they were saying, yeah, come with us, blah, blah, blah.
We go there, and who's performing at this rinky-dink club?
El Chicano.
What?
That's what it was.
They were just performing in some bar.
Who is El Chicano?
You don't know who El Chicano is?
No.
It's a Chicano rock band.
I'll play you some of their music.
So anyway, the next morning, and we stayed there with them that night.
And then the next day, we got a ride.
Somebody that was going back to Fresno.
And it turned out to be Richard.
Shit, I can't think of the guy's last name right now.
Richard Duran.
Ricardo Duran.
No number Richard.
It's not Ricardo Duran.
And so we hitch a ride with him, and he takes us back to Fresno, and then we get back home.
Everybody from the theater is already back in Fresno.
We were wondering what happened to you.
abandoned and um so anyway so so the chicano moratorium then became the chicano moratorium because of all of that shit that happened yeah but the background was that i was a part of an organized effort that the only organized effort that went out and promoted it to communities outside of california through the theater um
That is also the tour, 1970, where we were performing in Tierra Maria in this little, I don't know if it was a church or a little school.
And at the end of the performance, we ended up, because this is how we traveled, we said, anybody have room for us to stay?
We can sleep on the floor or whatever, you know?
And so this guy gets up and goes, I can take six of you.
Was it Dennis Hopper?
Yep.
Dennis Hopper.
So we ended up staying with Dennis Hopper like for three or four days at his hacienda.
With his personal cook.
I always had all these opposite contrasts through all this stuff.
Yeah.
But what I learned from the people there in Tierra Maria in New Mexico with the Dennis Hoppers and all that is that the local Mexicano community
was feeling oppressed, exploited, and their stuff being appropriated because they were being invaded by white hippies.
Like Dennis Hopper?
Yeah.
By setting up their little communes and all of that.
And just affecting their way of being, their way of life.
So I remember that.
That also added to my sense of Chigarismo.
Can I ask you about, you know the term Reconquista, right?
Yeah.
Would you say, because I know you had mentioned that
For you, you felt like part of what you understood as Chicanismo was a reclamation of territory, culture, spirituality, ways of life, ways of knowing.
Would you lump that in with that idea of Reconquista?
Yeah, that's Chicanos at their most nationalist perspective.
In other words,
They don't go beyond the, hey, this is our land, fuck you, get out.
Yeah.
I mean, there's that group out there, too.
Okay?
And so they organized the Marcha de la Reconquista from the border all the way to Sacramento.
And they went through Livingston.
As a matter of fact, they stayed in Livingston overnight.
When was that?
1970-something.
I don't remember the year.
I mean, you could probably look it up.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So your grandmother actually got involved in some of that because she helped coordinate their stay there and all that in Livingston.
But she was also a part of the Degana Huida Quetzalcoatl University and the takeover of that naval station.
Over by Davis?
Yep.
And she was a part of the...
occupiers.
And she was viewed as the Chicana spokesperson for that, for that group.
The native spokesperson was somebody else.
Yeah.
Okay.
And then let me ask you about the idea of Aslan, right?
Because you had mentioned earlier that
you know, oh, I had understood or, like, I learned about this story, right?
Whether from, like, other communities that you had interacted with.
And so I was kind of wondering, or actually what you said was that you had found out that they had similar kind of stories, right?
Or stories that, like, kind of corroborated things that you had already heard about.
BBs.
Histories, stories, cultural practices.
Yeah, so what I wanted to know was where did you first learn about that?
Of that idea?
Yeah, that idea of Aslan or that there were people from a certain area that migrated.
I learned about it.
I think that's Chewy.
Hold on.
Where?
I think he's gone.